README.md, before:

# ufscdown

This project was inspired by the 
[thesisdown](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown) package.
De facto, `ufscdown` (as well as `thesisdown`)  is only a customization of the
[bookdown](https://github.com/rstudio/bookdown) package. 
`ufscdown` customizes bookdown to the [UFSC](http://portal.bu.ufsc.br/normalizacao/)
format.
Check out this [link](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown#customizing-thesisdown-to-your-institution) 
for other examples.

Currently, the PDF and gitbook versions are fully-functional.  The word and epub 
versions are developmental, have no templates behind them, and are essentially 
calls to the appropriate functions in bookdown.

If you are new to working with `bookdown`/`rmarkdown`, please read over the 
documentation available in the `gitbook` template at 
https://thesisdown.netlify.com/.  This is also available below at 
https://ismayc.github.io/thesisdown_book.

The current output for the four versions is here:

- [PDF](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/blob/gh-pages/thesis.pdf) (
Generating LaTeX file is available 
[here](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/blob/gh-pages/thesis.tex) with 
other files at in the 
[book directory](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/tree/gh-pages).)
- [Word](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/blob/gh-pages/thesis.docx)
- [ePub](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/blob/gh-pages/thesis.epub)
- [gitbook](https://ismayc.github.io/thesisdown_book)

Under the hood, the [UFSC LaTeX template](http://portal.bu.ufsc.br/files/2013/10/Template-Trabalhos-Academicos-UFSC-A4-v1.3.zip) 
is used to ensure that documents conform precisely to submission standards. At 
the same time, composition and formatting can be done using lightweight 
[markdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/authoring_basics.html) syntax, and 
**R** code and its output can be seamlessly included using 
[rmarkdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com).

### Using ufscdown

Using **ufscdown** has some prerequisites which are described below. To 
compile PDF documents using **R**, you are going to need to have LaTeX installed. 
By far the easiest way to install LaTeX on any platform is with the 
[tinytex](https://yihui.name/tinytex/) R package:

```{r}
install.packages(c('tinytex', 'rmarkdown'))
tinytex::install_tinytex()
# after restarting RStudio, confirm that you have LaTeX with 
tinytex:::is_tinytex() 
```

You may need to install a few extra LaTeX packages on your first attempt to knit 
as well. Here is one such example of how to do so:

```{r}
tinytex::tlmgr_install("babel-portuges")
```

To use **ufscdown** from [RStudio](http://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/):

1) Ensure that you have already installed LaTeX and the fonts described above, 
and are using the latest version of 
[RStudio](http://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/). You can use 
`ufscdown` without RStudio. For example, you can write the `Rmd` files in your 
favourite text editor (e.g. [Atom](https://atom.io/), 
[Notepad++](https://notepad-plus-plus.org/)). But RStudio is probably the easiest 
tool for writing both R code and text in your thesis. It also provides a nice 
way to build your thesis while editing. We'll proceed assuming that you have 
decided to use the RStudio workflow.

2) Install the **bookdown** and **ufscdown** packages. Note that **ufscdown** is 
not available on CRAN at the moment and that's why 
`install.packages("ufscdown")` won't work. Use `remotes::install_github()` as 
shown below instead to install the package.

```r
if (!require("remotes")) 
  install.packages("remotes", repos = "http://cran.rstudio.org")
remotes::install_github("rstudio/bookdown")
remotes::install_github("lfpdroubi/ufscdown")
```

Note that you may need to restart RStudio at this point for the following dialog 
to show up.

3) Use the **New R Markdown** dialog to select **Thesis**:

    ![New R Markdown](thesis_rmd.png)

    Note that this will currently only **Knit** if you name the directory `index` 
    as shown above. This guarantees that `index.html` is generated correctly for 
    the Gitbook version of the thesis.

4) After choosing which type of output you'd like in the YAML at the top of 
index.Rmd, **Knit** the `index.Rmd` file to get the book in PDF or HTML formats.

### Day-to-day writing of your thesis 

You need to edit the individual chapter R Markdown files to write your thesis. 
It's recommended that you version control your thesis using GitHub if possible. 
RStudio can also easily sync up with GitHub to make the process easier. While 
writing, you should `git commit` your work frequently, after every major 
activity on your thesis. For example, every few paragraphs or section of text, 
and after major step of analysis development. You should `git push` at the end 
of each work session before you leave your computer or change tasks. For a 
gentle, novice-friendly guide to getting starting with using Git with R and 
RStudio, see <http://happygitwithr.com/>.

## Rendering

To render your thesis into a PDF, open `index.Rmd` in RStudio and then click the 
"knit" button. To change the output formats between PDF, gitbook and Word , look 
at the `output:` field in `index.Rmd` and comment-out the formats you don't want.

The PDF file of your thesis will be deposited in the `_book/` directory, by 
default.

## Components

The following components are ones you should edit to customize your thesis:

### `_bookdown.yml`

This is the main configuration file for your thesis. It determines what Rmd 
files are included in the output, and in what order. Arrange the order of your 
chapters in this file and ensure that the names match the names in your folders. 

### `index.Rmd`

This file contains all the meta information that goes at the beginning of your
document. You'll need to edit this to put your name on the first page, the title 
of your thesis, etc.

### `lista_siglas.tex` and `lista_simbolos.tex`

These are the only .tex files to be edited in latex format.

### `01-chap1.Rmd`, `02-chap2.Rmd`, etc.

These are the Rmd files for each chapter in your dissertation. Write your thesis 
in these. If you're writing in RStudio, you may find the 
[wordcount addin](https://github.com/benmarwick/wordcountaddin) useful for 
getting word counts and readability statistics in R Markdown documents.

### `bib/`

Store your bibliography (as bibtex files) here. We recommend using the 
[citr addin](https://github.com/crsh/citr) and [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/) 
to efficiently manage and insert citations. 

### `setup/`

Stores the file `ufscthesisA4-alf.sty`, that customizes 
[abntex](https://www.abntex.net.br/) to the UFSC format.


### `figure/` and `data/`

Store your figures and data here and reference them in your R Markdown files. 
See the [bookdown book](https://bookdown.org/yihui/bookdown/) for details on 
cross-referencing items using R Markdown.

Commit message:

adds option to install all the suggested packages.

README.md, after:

# ufscdown

This project was inspired by the 
[thesisdown](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown) package.
De facto, `ufscdown` (as well as `thesisdown`)  is only a customization of the
[bookdown](https://github.com/rstudio/bookdown) package. 
`ufscdown` customizes bookdown to the [UFSC](http://portal.bu.ufsc.br/normalizacao/)
format.
Check out this [link](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown#customizing-thesisdown-to-your-institution) 
for other examples.

Currently, the PDF and gitbook versions are fully-functional.  The word and epub 
versions are developmental, have no templates behind them, and are essentially 
calls to the appropriate functions in bookdown.

If you are new to working with `bookdown`/`rmarkdown`, please read over the 
documentation available in the `gitbook` template at 
https://thesisdown.netlify.com/.  This is also available below at 
https://ismayc.github.io/thesisdown_book.

The current output for the four versions is here:

- [PDF](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/blob/gh-pages/thesis.pdf) (
Generating LaTeX file is available 
[here](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/blob/gh-pages/thesis.tex) with 
other files at in the 
[book directory](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/tree/gh-pages).)
- [Word](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/blob/gh-pages/thesis.docx)
- [ePub](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown_book/blob/gh-pages/thesis.epub)
- [gitbook](https://ismayc.github.io/thesisdown_book)

Under the hood, the [UFSC LaTeX template](http://portal.bu.ufsc.br/files/2013/10/Template-Trabalhos-Academicos-UFSC-A4-v1.3.zip) 
is used to ensure that documents conform precisely to submission standards. At 
the same time, composition and formatting can be done using lightweight 
[markdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/authoring_basics.html) syntax, and 
**R** code and its output can be seamlessly included using 
[rmarkdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com).

### Using ufscdown

Using **ufscdown** has some prerequisites which are described below. To 
compile PDF documents using **R**, you are going to need to have LaTeX installed. 
By far the easiest way to install LaTeX on any platform is with the 
[tinytex](https://yihui.name/tinytex/) R package:

```{r}
install.packages(c('tinytex', 'rmarkdown'))
tinytex::install_tinytex()
# after restarting RStudio, confirm that you have LaTeX with 
tinytex:::is_tinytex() 
```

You may need to install a few extra LaTeX packages on your first attempt to knit 
as well. Here is one such example of how to do so:

```{r}
tinytex::tlmgr_install("babel-portuges")
```

To use **ufscdown** from [RStudio](http://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/):

1) Ensure that you have already installed LaTeX and the fonts described above, 
and are using the latest version of 
[RStudio](http://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/). You can use 
`ufscdown` without RStudio. For example, you can write the `Rmd` files in your 
favourite text editor (e.g. [Atom](https://atom.io/), 
[Notepad++](https://notepad-plus-plus.org/)). But RStudio is probably the easiest 
tool for writing both R code and text in your thesis. It also provides a nice 
way to build your thesis while editing. We'll proceed assuming that you have 
decided to use the RStudio workflow.

2) Install the **bookdown** and **ufscdown** packages. Note that **ufscdown** is 
not available on CRAN at the moment and that's why 
`install.packages("ufscdown")` won't work. Use `remotes::install_github()` as 
shown below instead to install the package.

```r
if (!require("remotes")) 
  install.packages("remotes", repos = "http://cran.rstudio.org")
remotes::install_github("lfpdroubi/ufscdown")
# or, if you wish, install all the suggested packages:
remotes::install_github("lfpdroubi/ufscdown", 
                        dependencies = c("Imports", "Suggests"))
```

Note that you may need to restart RStudio at this point for the following dialog 
to show up.

3) Use the **New R Markdown** dialog to select **Thesis**:

    ![New R Markdown](thesis_rmd.png)

    Note that this will currently only **Knit** if you name the directory `index` 
    as shown above. This guarantees that `index.html` is generated correctly for 
    the Gitbook version of the thesis.

4) After choosing which type of output you'd like in the YAML at the top of 
index.Rmd, **Knit** the `index.Rmd` file to get the book in PDF or HTML formats.

### Day-to-day writing of your thesis 

You need to edit the individual chapter R Markdown files to write your thesis. 
It's recommended that you version control your thesis using GitHub if possible. 
RStudio can also easily sync up with GitHub to make the process easier. While 
writing, you should `git commit` your work frequently, after every major 
activity on your thesis. For example, every few paragraphs or section of text, 
and after major step of analysis development. You should `git push` at the end 
of each work session before you leave your computer or change tasks. For a 
gentle, novice-friendly guide to getting starting with using Git with R and 
RStudio, see <http://happygitwithr.com/>.

## Rendering

To render your thesis into a PDF, open `index.Rmd` in RStudio and then click the 
"knit" button. To change the output formats between PDF, gitbook and Word , look 
at the `output:` field in `index.Rmd` and comment-out the formats you don't want.

The PDF file of your thesis will be deposited in the `_book/` directory, by 
default.

## Components

The following components are ones you should edit to customize your thesis:

### `_bookdown.yml`

This is the main configuration file for your thesis. It determines what Rmd 
files are included in the output, and in what order. Arrange the order of your 
chapters in this file and ensure that the names match the names in your folders. 

### `index.Rmd`

This file contains all the meta information that goes at the beginning of your
document. You'll need to edit this to put your name on the first page, the title 
of your thesis, etc.

### `lista_siglas.tex` and `lista_simbolos.tex`

These are the only .tex files to be edited in latex format.

### `01-chap1.Rmd`, `02-chap2.Rmd`, etc.

These are the Rmd files for each chapter in your dissertation. Write your thesis 
in these. If you're writing in RStudio, you may find the 
[wordcount addin](https://github.com/benmarwick/wordcountaddin) useful for 
getting word counts and readability statistics in R Markdown documents.

### `bib/`

Store your bibliography (as bibtex files) here. We recommend using the 
[citr addin](https://github.com/crsh/citr) and [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/) 
to efficiently manage and insert citations. 

### `setup/`

Stores the file `ufscthesisA4-alf.sty`, that customizes 
[abntex](https://www.abntex.net.br/) to the UFSC format.


### `figure/` and `data/`

Store your figures and data here and reference them in your R Markdown files. 
See the [bookdown book](https://bookdown.org/yihui/bookdown/) for details on 
cross-referencing items using R Markdown.
